Creoltools
**********

Copyright (C) 2007, 2008 Marcel Kyas

This file is free documentation; the Free Software Foundation gives
unlimited permission to copy, distribute and modify it.

   These are the creoltools, tools for writing, simulating, and
analysing Creol programs.

   Creol is a formal language for modelling (and eventually
programming) distributed, object-oriented systems.  Creol supports
inter-object communication using asynchronous communication, multiple
inheritance, and active objects.

   This package contains:

   * An interpreter for Creol models, written in Maude.

   * A compiler from the surface language into the representation of the
     interpreter.


   This package comes with extensive documentation in the `info'
directory.  You can access it using the `info' reader, e.g., by
invoking `info -f info/creoltools.info'.

   The documentation can also be formatted for printing.  The command
`make pdf' can format the documentation into the pdf document
`info/creoltools.pdf', which is suitable for online reading and
printing.  You will need the program `texi2pdf' to format the
documentation as a pdf document.  See below for details.

Installation Instructions
=========================

   Briefly, the shell commands `./configure; make; make install' should
configure, build, and install this package.

   The file `INSTALL' contains general installation instructions.  This
file explains the specific installation instructions.

   After installing the tool, the environment variable `MAUDE_LIB'
should be edited to include the directory `DATADIR/creoltools', e.g.,
by adding the line `export MAUDE_LIB=$MAUDE_LIB:DATADIR/creoltools' to
your `~/.profile' file, where `DATADIR' should be replaced by the
installation directory.  The default is `/usr/local/share'.  Please
consult your system's manual or your system administrator for the file
and the exact commands for this change.

   The creoltools will by default be installed into `/usr/local', or
the directories specified by the `--prefix' and related options.  The
run-time support files will be installed into the directory
`DATADIR/creoltools', where `DATADIR' defaults to `PREFIX/share'.

Dependencies
============

This software is written in OCaml.  You will need to have a working
OCaml development environment, including findlib installed.  Please
consult your system administrator or your distribution provider on how
to install this environment.  You will find some distribution specific
instructions below.  You can obtain the source code and some binary
packages for OCaml from `http://caml.inria.fr/ocaml/index.en.html'.
The creoltools should compile with versions 3.09.3, 3.10.0, 3.10.1, and
3.10.2.  Other versions may work but have not been tested.

   The creoltools use findlib for compilation.

   `http://projects.camlcity.org/projects/findlib.html'

   An alternative is to obtain the required package from GODI
`http://godi.camlcity.org/godi/index.html', which helps in managing
some of the dependencies.

   The compiler can be configured to generate XML documents.  In order
to use this feature, you need to have ocaml-libxml2 version 0.0j or
later installed on your system.  The ocaml-libxml2 library is available
from `http://heim.ifi.uio.no/~kyas/creoltools'.

Operating System Specific Notes
===============================

We collect notes that are specific to different operating systems and
distributions in this section.  The author of the software develops the
software using the Fedora 9 Linux distribution.  Therefore, this
distribution is supported best.

Linux
-----

Fedora 9
........

The command `yum install ocaml ocaml-findlib libxml2-devel
libxslt-devel' installs all dependencies when executed with the proper
privileges.

Ubuntu 7.10
...........

Apparently, the command `apt-get install ocaml ocaml-findlib
libxml2-dev libxslt1-dev' installs all dependencies needed to compile
creoltools as described above.

MacOS
-----

The tools are known to compile under MacOS.  The dependencies were
satisfied from Darwin Ports (`http://darwinports.com/'.  The
caml-menhir package is installed incorrectly. Rebuilding the parser may
fail with "/share/lib/standard.mly" not found. In this case, install a
link from /share to /opt/share.

Windows
-------

We do not know how to install the tools under Windows.  Since I do not
use Windows at all, I cannot provide support.

