\input texinfo	@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename creoltools.info
@settitle @acronym{CREOL} Tools
@c %**end of header
@c @documentlanguage en
@documentencoding US-ASCII
@afourpaper
@include version.texi

@copying
This manual is describing Tools for @acronym{CREOL}
(version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}).

Copyright @copyright{} 2007, 2008 Marcel Kyas.

@quotation
This work has been financially supported by European Projects,
IST-33826 Credo and IST-2001-33522 Omega, the German Research Council,
and the Norwegian Research Council.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation.
@c ; with no Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover texts being
@c ``A GNU Manual,'' and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free
Documentation License.''

@c (a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have freedom to copy and
@c modify this GNU Manual, like GNU software.  Copies published by the
@c Free Software Foundation raise funds for GNU development.''
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory @acronym{CREOL}
@direntry
* creoltools:: A @acronym{CREOL} Compiler.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title @acronym{CREOL} Tools User Guide
@subtitle for version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author Marcel Kyas
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top 

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::          Introduction to @acronym{CREOL} and its tools.
* CREOL Tutorial::        An introduction to the @acronym{CREOL} language.
* Types and Expressions::
* Classes and Interfaces::
* Communication::         Communication within and between objects.
* Control Flow::
* CREOL Language::        A description of the @acronym{CREOL} language.
* CREOL Prelude::         The standard library for @acronym{CREOL}.
* Pragmatic Advice::      Pragmatic Advice a.k.a. @code{pragma}.
* Real-time CREOL::       Using @acronym{CREOL} for Timed Models.
* CREOL Machine Code::    @acronym{CREOL} Machine Code.
* Model-checking CREOL::  Using Maude to Model-Check @acronym{CREOL} programs.
* creolc::                How to use the @command{creolc} compiler.
* creolupdc::             How to use the @command{creolupdc} update compiler.
* Installation Instructions::	Installation instructions.
@c Appendices start here
* Grammar::               The grammar definition of @acronym{CREOL}.
* CMC Grammar::           The grammar definition of the @acronym{CMC}.
* FAQ::                   Frequently asked questions.
* Reporting Bugs::        Reporting bugs well.
@c * Bibliography::          Further reading.
* Copying::               License for copying the described software.
* GNU Free Documentation License:: License for copying this manual.
* Index::                 Index of concepts.
* Datatype Index::        Index of predefined data types.
* Function Index::        Index of predefined functions.
@end menu

@include introduction.texi
@include creoltut.texi
@include creolexpr.texi
@include creolcls.texi
@include creolcomm.texi
@include creolflow.texi
@include creol.texi
@include pragma.texi
@include creollib.texi
@include creolrt.texi
@include cmc.texi
@include creolmc.texi
@include creolc.texi
@include creolupdc.texi


@node Installation Instructions
@chapter Installation Instructions

@menu
* Dependencies::		Thinks needed for compiling and installing.
* OS Specific Instructions::	Operating system specific instructions.
* Basic Installation::		Basic Installation.
* Compilers and Options::       Selecting compilers and optimization
* Multiple Architectures::      Compiling for multiple architectures at once
* Installation Names::          Installing in different directories
* Optional Features::           Selecting optional features
* System Type::                 Specifying the system type
* Sharing Defaults::            Setting site-wide defaults for @command{configur
e}
* Defining Variables::          Specifying the compiler etc.
* configure Invocation::        Changing how @command{configure} runs
@end menu

@set creoltools
@include readme.texi
@include install.texi



@c Appendices start here.

@include grammar.texi
@include cmcgrammar.texi
@include faq.texi
@include bugs.texi

@c @include bibliography.texi
@c @include bugs.texi

@include gpl.texi

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@unnumbered GNU Free Documentation License
@c @raisesections
@include fdl.texi
@c @lowersections

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp


@node Datatype Index
@unnumbered Datatype Index
@printindex tp

@node Function Index
@unnumbered Function Index
@printindex fn

@bye
@c The release history is maintained here to force an update of this file
@c with each release.  This will set version and date in @file{version.texi}
@c to its correct values.
@c
@c Version 0.0m (r2092) was released on November 24, 2008.
@c Version 0.0l (r2003) was released on November 03, 2008.
@c Version 0.0k (r1695) was released on September 13, 2008.
@c Version 0.0j (r1447) was released on June 9, 2008.
@c Version 0.0i (r1271) was released on February 26, 2008.
@c Version 0.0h (r1124) was released on January 11, 2008.
@c Version 0.0g (r901) was released on September 10, 2007.
@c Version 0.0f (r685) was released on Jul 10, 2007.
@c Version 0.0e (r595) was released on June 22, 2007.
@c Version 0.0d (r568) was released on June 17, 2007.
@c Version 0.0c (r494) was released on May 7, 2007.
@c Version 0.0b (r365) was released on March 16, 2007.
@c Version 0.0a (r275) was released on March 5, 2007.

@c Local Variables: 
@c mode: texinfo
@c TeX-master: t
@c End: 
