@node creolshell
@chapter The @command{creolshell}
@cindex @command{creolshell}

The @command{creolshell} is a convenience program, which compiles the
input arguments to the Maude format and calls @command{maude} with the
resulting file.

The @command{creolshell} accepts all command line arguments, that are
accepted by @command{maude} and by @code{creolc} (see @pxref{creolc}),
except for the following differences:

These options of @command{maude} are interpreted by
@command{creolshell}:
@table @option
@item -no-prelude
The generated Maude model requires the prelude of @command{maude},
therefore, this option is ignored.

@item -batch
The purpose of the shell is to run maude in an interactive session,
therefore, this option is ignored.

@item -interactive
The purpose of the shell is to run maude in an interactive session,
therefore, this option is always provided.
@end table

These options of @command{creolc} are interpreted by
@command{creolshell}:
@table @option
@item -o @var{name}
Usually, @command{creolshell} writes the model into a temporary file,
which is deleted after the Maude session.  If this option is given,
the file is written to @var{name} and preserved.

@item -target @var{name}
The target may only be one of @option{maude} or @option{maudemc}, all
other targets give rise to an error message.

@item -red-init
This option will always be supplied to the compiler.
@end table

The options @option{--help} and @option{--version} are both passed to
@command{maude} @emph{and} @command{creolc}.


Additionally, the following arguments are accepted by
@command{creolshell}.
@table @option
@item -creolc
This options allows to specify the name and path to the
@command{creolc} binary.

@item -maude
This option allows to specify the name and path to the @command{maude}
binary.

@item -keep-output
This option instructs @command{creolshell} to not to delete the output
file.

@item -verbose
In addition to passing this flag to @command{creolc}, it causes
@command{creolshell} to print more information about what it is doing.
@end table
