@ifclear creoltools
@unnumbered Creoltools

Copyright @copyright{} 2007, 2008 Marcel Kyas

This file is free documentation; the Free Software Foundation gives
unlimited permission to copy, distribute and modify it.

These are the creoltools, tools for writing, simulating, and analysing
Creol programs.

Creol is a formal language for modelling (and eventually
programming) distributed, object-oriented systems.  Creol supports
inter-object communication using asynchronous communication, multiple
inheritance, and active objects.

This package contains:

@itemize
@item
An interpreter for Creol models, written in Maude.

@item
A compiler from the surface language into the representation of the
interpreter.

@end itemize

This package comes with extensive documentation in the @file{info}
directory.  You can access it using the @command{info} reader, e.g.,
by invoking @samp{info -f info/creoltools.info}.

The documentation can also be formatted for printing.  The command
@samp{make pdf} can format the documentation into the pdf document
@file{info/creoltools.pdf}, which is suitable for online reading
and printing.  You will need the program @command{texi2pdf} to
format the documentation as a pdf document.  See below for
details.


@section Installation Instructions
@end ifclear

Briefly, the shell commands @samp{./configure; make; make install}
should configure, build, and install this package.

@ifclear creoltools
The file @file{INSTALL} contains general installation instructions.
This file explains the specific installation instructions.
@end ifclear
@ifset creoltools
The Section @ref{Basic Installation} contains general installation
instructions.
@end ifset

After installing the tool, the environment variable @env{MAUDE_LIB}
should be edited to include the directory
@file{@var{datadir}/creoltools}, e.g., by adding the line @samp{export
MAUDE_LIB=$MAUDE_LIB:@var{datadir}/creoltools} to your @file{~/.profile}
file, where @file{@var{datadir}} should be replaced by the installation
directory.  The default is @file{/usr/local/share}.  Please consult your
system's manual or your system administrator for the file and the exact
commands for this change.

The creoltools will by default be installed into @file{/usr/local}, or
the directories specified by the @samp{--prefix} and related options.
The run-time support files will be installed into the directory
@file{@var{datadir}/creoltools}, where @file{@var{datadir}} defaults to
@file{@var{prefix}/share}.

@ifset creoltools
Section @ref{Environment Variables} provides more information on the
environment variables that influence the behaviour of the creoltools.
@end ifset


@node Dependencies
@section Dependencies

This software is written in OCaml.  You will need to have a working
OCaml development environment, including findlib installed.  Please
consult your system administrator or your distribution provider on
how to install this environment.  You will find some distribution
specific instructions below.  You can obtain the source code and some
binary packages for OCaml from
@url{http://caml.inria.fr/ocaml/index.en.html}.  The creoltools should
compile with versions 3.09.3, 3.10.0, 3.10.1, and 3.10.2.  Other versions
may work but have not been tested.

The creoltools use findlib for compilation.  

@url{http://projects.camlcity.org/projects/findlib.html}

An alternative is to obtain the required package from GODI
@url{http://godi.camlcity.org/godi/index.html}, which helps
in managing some of the dependencies.

The compiler can be configured to generate XML documents.  In order to
use this feature, you need to have ocaml-libxml2 version 0.0j or later
installed on your system.  The ocaml-libxml2 library is available from
@url{http://heim.ifi.uio.no/~kyas/creoltools}.


@node OS Specific Instructions
@section Operating System Specific Notes

We collect notes that are specific to different operating systems and
distributions in this section.  The author of the software develops
the software using the Fedora 9 Linux distribution.  Therefore, this
distribution is supported best.


@subsection Linux

@subsubsection Fedora 9

The command
@samp{yum install ocaml ocaml-findlib libxml2-devel libxslt-devel}
installs all dependencies when executed with the proper privileges.


@subsubsection Ubuntu 7.10

Apparently, the command
@samp{apt-get install ocaml ocaml-findlib libxml2-dev libxslt1-dev}
installs all dependencies needed to compile creoltools as described
above.


@subsection MacOS

The tools are known to compile under MacOS.  The dependencies were
satisfied from Darwin Ports (@url{http://darwinports.com/}.
The caml-menhir package is installed incorrectly. Rebuilding the
parser may fail with ``/share/lib/standard.mly'' not found. In this
case, install a link from /share to /opt/share.


@subsection Windows

We do not know how to install the tools under Windows.  Since I
do not use Windows at all, I cannot provide support.
